When you loan people your money, especially family and friends, they can let you down by not paying back their debt and, often, completely avoiding you as a consequence. In this article, we give you tips on how to deal with the situation. Before you lend money to your family member or friend, create a contract or promissory note. The contract or promissory note should specify the amount borrowed, any agreed interest you will be charging and the repayment terms. That way you’ll know where you stand and if your family member or friend ever refuses to pay you back, you have a legally binding document to use as evidence. Always keep a record – from SMSes, WhatsApp conversations, telephone recordings, payment agreements, email conversations and letters of demands because people are not always trustworthy, and this will also help you when you decide to take the legal route. Also, try to transfer the money electronically so that you have evidence should the person refuse to repay you. If the person who owes you money is late on a payment, first remind them politely and ensure that your request is in writing, either by email, SMSes, WhatsApp conversations or in a written letter. Although you may be irritated or angry, it always helps to be polite and respectful in your tone and manner so that you don’t upset them. Perhaps your debtor has a legitimate reason for not paying you back and it will help both parties if you can get to the bottom of this. If none of these strategies work, then it might be time to approach the Small Claims Court or use a professional debt collector. Small Claims Court offers a quicker and easier way of resolving certain civil disputes. You do not need a lawyer to represent you at a small claims court. All official languages may be used and if you are a minor (i.e. under 18) you will need to be represented by an adult. Here’s a Small Claims Court step by step guide from The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development (the doj and cd): The clerk of the court will prepare a summons which will force the person to come to court at the set date. The summons can be delivered by you or the sheriff of the court. Please always remember the date and time when your case will be heard and be there to state your case. For more information you can contact your nearest magistrate’s court. If going to court is going to be too much of a hassle, you can request a debt collection agency to collect the money on your behalf. Getting a professional debt collector on board increases your odds of getting paid, mostly because they’re more persistent than you would be. Debt collectors also have tools that you don’t have at your disposal, like third-party sources that give them access to information about the person who owes you money. The disadvantages of using debt collection agencies is that you’re charged a fee and they can charge up to 50% of payment for their services. DISCLAIMER The views expressed in this article do not constitute legal advice and is merely for informational purposes. Featured image via Pix4free